and so you both mentioned the fine
tuning of the Universe um and so that
Discovery comes from science um and so
in your last interview with Richard
Dawkins he said this was the nearest
approach to a good argument uh
so and so considering most people are
listening to this are novices to science
can you unpack what what fine tuning is
sure and it's a fairly recent
realization actually you know we do have
this remarkable set of equations that
govern the behavior of matter and energy
the gravity uh follows an invos Square
law that the speed of light is fixed um
that U all all the properties of the
atom follow certain abilities and rules
about how they stick together or fly
apart those laws beautiful as they are
have constants in them that I don't know
really anybody who will say we can
derive the value of those constants from
first principles
they're related to each other so maybe
there's some connection between them but
you can't figure out what they have to
be on the basis of theory you have to go
and measure that and so they have a
particular Val and maybe the easiest one
to explain is gravity because that's
certainly familiar to us in every death
so yeah there's that inverse Square law
and there's the gravitational constant
and that is of course important uh in
the beginning of the universe for the
way in which after a inflationary period
of everything flying apart they began to
actually coals and that's how we got
clouds of gas which then became
ultimately stars and planets and moons
and ultimately us here talking about it
so gravity is pretty important but if
you tweak the value of that
gravitational constant just a little bit
depending on who you ask and whose
calculation you did I mean a very little
bit maybe one part in a million what is
the one part in a million one like how
can you contextualize that okay if you
imagine the gravitational constant out
to seven decimal places and you change
that last decimal place that was an
eight into a seven and the rest is all
the same and then you go through the
math about what would happen if it was
just a little bit weaker there is it
quite enough there uh to get the
coalescence to happen and so you end up
with things just flying apart in a
pretty boring sterile way if you make it
just a little stronger then B come
together a little sooner but also the
expansion of the universe has a limit
and knowing that it takes billions of
years before you get to the point where
something Al like complexity of chemistry can happen because of all the
things that have to happen in Stars you never get to that point uh everything
would collapse back in a big crunch so
in order to have this possibility of something beautiful and interesting that
had to have exactly that do and the strong and the weak nuclear force and
multiple other constants all have to have that same property so you're talking
about the conditions needed for life to exist on Earth or for anything
interesting it's not just about this kind of life or this kind of Earth just
anything beyond some particles which hard to me imagine much Intelligence
coming out of particles flying apart by
themselves so anything that you would
call thought seems to require these
particular parameters to be set in a
very precise way and that seems to cry
out for an explanation and again as
somebody who also finds Beauty in the
equations I find awe in the values of
those constants and they do call out to
me for an
intelligence that is far beyond anything
I could possibly imagine who I don't
think had to sit there and punch and get
just knew and thought and here it
was and I get it that the alternative is
that there are an infinite number of
other parallel
universes and of course we have to be in
the one where something interesting
could happen to have this conversation
but the inability to ever
measure except in the weirdest sort of
way uh the possibility that those really
exist seems then to require a great leap
of faith uh to believe in the Multiverse
maybe for me greater than believing in a
Creator who made it this way for our
universe so yeah I I think it seems a
little too easy to dismiss that and go
well it's the Multiverse think think
about that the other thing is that
doesn't solve the question of why
there's something instead of nothing
yeah sort of the big ultimate question
and that also seems to require some kind
of an uncaused cause to have their
Bea yeah so I mean in essence it was
fine tun I think I saw this online
somewhere but someone was saying like if
you took a pencil or something and you
like threw it across the universe at a
bullseye on like Pluto or something that
like the like and hitting it would be
like that would be the chances that life
would exist or something and so the
argument essentially is that with
fine-tuning life is just so incredibly
unlikely that like what is the
explanation for that I've heard you talk
about this a little bit in um in your
podcast and interviews and I think you
said that this you find this going to be
pelling but doesn't really move you
really but so can you explain what your
of course it's compelling it's a great
mystery and it's an amazing finding
right that if we were to adapt these
values then nothing could exist there
are so many questions that spring up in
my mind there are just so many it's just
difficult to know where to begin I mean
we said for a moment ago you know God
doesn't punch in those numbers he just
kind of knows that that's how it has to
be he doesn't have to punch anything is
God is God constrained by these
constants he chooses to be he chooses to
be I don't know that in his existence
those constants exist he's not part he
created but he is not himself part of
the created universe so this is the
thing that that sort of confounds me is
that before the universe exists and you
just have sort of God up in The Ether
he's sort of thinking about creating
this universe to put it crudely and for
some
reason God is confined to these very narrow
restraints and in fact could not create
a life permitting universe but within
those
constraints and those and and and
therefore before this universe is even
created God is in some way constrained
by the strong and nuclear forces I don't
understand that at all you're suggesting
that God is part of the creation that
God put in place for the universe God
doesn't have to be constrained that way
God is outside of space outside of time
yeah not not B basically having to
adhere to any of such I don't mean that
God is constrained by those forces that
they're like acting upon him I mean that
he's constrained in the sense that he
can only create a material world that
abides by those particular constraints
oh I think you create any material word
I think he wanted to create one that was
interesting and so he made the selection
of those equations and those Constance
in order for it not to just be a big
waste of time but would it have been
impossible for him to create a universe
that's life emitting and just as
interesting in which gravity was
Stronger well I don't think it would
have been as
interesting God was interested you
thought but but I mean a thought for
missing Universe right so it's like a
universe where basically everything is
the same as a it is now let's say that
um that the gravity is stronger but this
dark energy that's causing the universe
to expand is a bit stronger or there's
some other introduced force or or in
other words when God goes to create the
universe is he constrained in the sense
that if he wants to create this thought
permitting universe that everything has
to be so finally balanc in other words
I'm not sure why the meta conditions are
set up so that everything is on on such
a knife edge maybe I can spell it out
like this right so
imagine I have a friend who um Phil
Halper who made this documentary about
the the funi argument and there was a
really interesting response that made
reference to the Gnostic Christian
tradition the the Christian gnostics
believed in the the sort of the material
world being the product of an evil
demiurge it's like uh that this God of
the Old Testament is the is the evil
creator of the material world and Jesus
represents the true God who is you know
spiritually pure and above all and he
was like well doesn't the fine tuning
argument kind of fit in better with this
kind of picture of the universe why
because the spiritual Creator who who
realizes that the material world is evil
and terrible doesn't want the material
world to come about and so he makes it
so that it is near on impossible for a
material Universe like this to exist and
yet the evil demiurge wants to create
that universe and so he comes in and he
perfectly Tunes everything so although
it's completely improbable he just makes
it right that the material world can can
be created but I think that this kind of
slightly um contrived image can help to
demonstrate is that the very fact that
it is so difficult to bring
about the the material world but by
finally tuning these constraints is
itself sort of a a backfiring against
the existence of a Creator God who wants
there to be a universe like this and has
the power to do it in any way which he
pleases for example another analogy from
the same documentary if if you were to
if you were to have like a a bag of of
of balls and you were pulling out
pulling out a ball and you were trying
to figure out what the favorite color of
the of the creator of the of the bag was
and you reach in and you pull out a
purple ball that might be confirming
evidence that the creator of the game
likes the color purple but if you then
tipped out every other ball and looked
that every single other one except for
the one that you picked was yellow you
might actually think oh okay the the
creator of this game clearly prefers
yellow but I just happen to have picked
the blue one now obviously that analogy
doesn't work CU that revolves around
chance but the point specifically being
that if the conditions are set up so
that there are an almost infinite number
of ways that things could have been
where none of this could have happened
and only one very precise way that it
could have happened the person who sets
up that meta condition what are we to
make of of of their view of of the
universe you see what I'm saying